Okay.
Hey, Sarah, thank you very much for joining the committee today.
Uh, very good to see you. Uh, we've got members around the,
round the room here today. Um, we have you for 10 minutes
so, um, if you want to leave us some time for questions that would be helpful.
But ultimately it's, it's your time so I will hand that to you now.
Thank you.
Oh, Kia ora. Thank you so much, Sam.
Um, so I'll just, uh, give about a
five-minute talk. Hopefully I can keep it to that and then time for questions.
Um, and I'll run through a little bit of, sort of, uh, more
basic information and then get into more what we do to address
methamphetamine harm in the community.
So, um, thank you very much for having me. It's a very, very important topic.
I think, um, particularly important because as you know methamphetamine
consumption has doubled in the country in that, um, huge
increase has been sustained for something like 18 months at this
point. Um, so we don't imagine that's going away anytime
soon. Um, so this is something that it's really
good for Parliament to understand and be able to grapple with, um,
as time m- marches on. We've been really pleased to see some
announcements of some health interventions, um, from government which we have
applauded, um, more recently. Um, so,
um, methamphetamine is a stimulant, um, and it's in a group of
substances called amphetamines, um, like speed, uh,
which was around in the '90s in particular.
Um, it's snorted, injected, smoked, and swallowed, and there are different
harms that come with the different types of routes of administration, as we
call it. Um, swallowing, for example, can help to avoid some of the
harms if it's very carefully dosed.
Um, and different, uh, routes of administration, like injecting, can come with
communicable disease and things like, uh, sterile injecting equipment through the
needle exchangers, uh, help to counter some of those harms.
Um,
we can have more acute harms that happen, uh, when people are taking a
lot, like a type of overdose that we call
over-amping where the person might experience seizures,
um, uh, a racing heart, chest pain, um, a
high temperature, and those kinds of things, or
psychosis. Um, and more chronic harms are things
like it being a cardiotoxic substance and resulting in
cardiovascular issues. Uh, smoke- smoking can result in
tooth decay and so forth. Um, we have a really long
history with amphetamine use in New Zealand.
Um, in the 1960s it was available, amphetamines were available from
pharmacies. Um, I understand, uh, sometimes it was given
on flights as a little pick-me-up as you arrived (laughs) into, uh, different
countries. Um, and it became very popular in the
1990s as some as you- some of you will recall.
Um, it was being manufactured with cold and flu medication at the
time. Then when pseudoephedrine was banned, it was replaced with
imported produc- imported products.
Um, the reason for the consumption having doubled we think is
multifaceted. So, um, the price has come down.
Uh, that's probably linked to changes in our organized crime
environment and an increase in the international supply.
And certainly we're seeing more methamphetamine in other countries that haven't
experienced as much methamphetamine in their drug
supply. On top of that, methamphetamine
has, um, a hunger suppressant effect.
Um, so it can also be, uh, people might seek it out to suppress
hunger or, um, deal with some hardship that they might be
experiencing, um, like being cold and being
outdoors. Um, and about 1% of the
population use methamphetamine.
In the most recent New Zealand, uh, Ministry of Health data, that
1% figure was actually confirmed again.
What we do think is that people, uh...
So that increased consumption, so it's measured through the
wastewater. And wastewater you sometimes hear a bit of
misinformation about. So the wastewater picks up, um,
methamphetamine that's been metabolized, i.e.
it's been through the human body so it's not a product that's been dumped down
the toilet, if you like. Um, and, um, it does
exclude septic tanks but it's a very, very good measure of our
total volume of methamphetamine consumed in the country.
So, the most recent, um, New Zealand Drug Trend survey
information we have, um, does show a very
big increase in the frequency of use among some people.
So most people who use meth use it pretty infrequently, but
we've seen a growth in the, um, frequency of use, uh, with,
worryingly, we've gone from 19% using it, um,
daily or almost daily back in 2022, '23,
up to 29%. So we've had like a 10%
increase, or 10% of the total population who use
methamphetamine now using it daily.
Um,
so, um, that's some of the background.
and
I think it's important to note that not everybody who uses methamphetamine actually
n- needs addiction treatment. So most people use it
very infrequently. And one of the things we've been trying to encourage is more
support along the spectrum of use, both with harm reduction
and other types of more accessible types of treatment.
So we've been talking about mutual aid.
So mutual aid, most famously you'll be aware of Narcotics
Anonymous or, um, alcohol A- AA meetings.
Um, there's some other types of, um, that kind of
community-led, uh-... the kind of supports that
can happen much more, uh, early in somebody's trajectory,
doesn't require them to submit to a higher
power or, um, decide that they're going to be completely abstinent from the
get-go. That could be much more useful in terms of helping
to, uh, people to manage their use much more earlier in their, uh,
equation.
One of the, um, things about methamphetamine is the reasons people
use it. So people use it to, uh, enable them to
work really long hours. Uh, they might use it as a party
substance, um, which might not be how people perceive it's being
used. Um, it can be because of the nature of the effects of
methamphetamine, it can be helpful from, uh, for people who are using
it for sexual, uh, you know, uh, sex work
or for, um, the chemsex community.
Um, it also helps to suppress hunger, as I mentioned.
And for people who use ADHD, so we're increasingly aware of that,
um, it can also be, um, used as a form of
self-medication. Not recommending that, of course.
Um, but actually we are really aware that people do use it very knowingly for
self-medication. A very recent University of
Queensland, um, research, um, which
is their sort of drug trends research, um, they've
asked, um, their cohort of people who use illicit
stimulants and people who inject drugs, so two different cohorts but there's
crossover there, um, and they found that over
half of them met the criteria for the DSM for
ADHD. Um, very few of them were
diagnosed. Um, an even smaller group were actually being
treated, but a huge number of them were reporting that they
were self-medicating using illicits- illicitly acquired
medications or substances. So some of
what we think would help, um,
is, um, on the supply side, so we've invested very heavily
in the policing and supply seizure stuff.
And on the one hand, it feels, um, really efficacious but on
another hand- on another hand, it has its limitations.
So first of all, it can be very short-lived, so Operation High
Water in Opotiki that you might remember was in the news
late last year, so in November 2024, the
police managed to get methamphetamine consumption approximately halved
but by April, we were back at similar levels as the
pre-seizure. Now that amount is bouncing around, um, and I
understand that police are working with the wider system to try and
marry up the seizures with the, um, demand reduction activities
but there are some limitations and it's very expensive.
So we're very quick to put money into that side of things but very reticent to put
it on the health side of things, which is much more long
term, uh, ef- ef- effective
change. The other thing is sometimes there can be
unintended consequences of the seizures, so usually the
drug will be replaced, whether it's replaced with the same drug or a different drug
can be really problematic as well so there can be an unintended
outcome of overdoses and other problems.
So some of the demand side interventions that we think, uh, would be really
helpful and some of this has been, um, covered by the government's recent package
so we're very happy about that, is just increasing the
support for substance use disorder treatment, so addiction
treatment, harm reduction, um, the types
of help so mutual aid and more support along the spectrum of
use. Um, not waiting for somebody to be in jail or
to have addiction before offering them help and that's particularly
important in this particular, um, issue because
people who are long term substance use disorder,
um, they're often then selling some of the product in order for them
to be able to support their habits.
You're actually propping up the supply when you fail to address the
demand. Um, looking at the ADHD
component, um, looking at Te Ara Oranga, some of Te Ara
Oranga's approaches up north have been copied by this new package so the
government have announced.
We're, we're almost at time, Sarah, just-
Yeah. ... FYI.
Medically assisted treatment, um, there's some really new evidence coming through
on medically assisted treatment so stimulant supply, uh,
st- st- stimulant substitution therapy or even
psilocybin, there's emerging evidence of, um, and stigma,
reducing stigma so that people actually come forward for help and I'll stop
talking. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Almost perfect at 10 minutes-
(laughs)
... but I'll go to Ingrid.
Thank you, Sarah, for the, um, great evidenced-based work that you and your
organization do and for your advocacy.
Um, I'm really interested in your commentary around supply and demand
side, um, and the balance of that and I note the Helen Clark Foundation
has recently showed that there is a, an appetite for more funding
to go into supporting people on the demand
side. I guess if we're looking at what the barriers are, uh, it
seems to me that workforce but also referrals through GPs to mental
health services, um, could be inhibitors even if we were able to
recalibrate some of the spending.
Do you have some commentary on that and some potential solutions that
could help to get more support on the, on the supply
side? Sorry, the demand side.
And I'll just say that w- to be, um, we're over time so if we can
be-
Okay, I'll keep it short.
... to the point would be great. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I think a couple of things.
Not everything has to be, um, uh, so you can have
peer-led interventions like mutual aid that will help to add
capacity. You've also seen some positive announcements on workforce
that have come from government more recently.
Um, so there'll be 15 new, um, people being trained as I understand it from
the workforce package as part of that methamphetamine package.
I think it's good to bring new people in so there's a sort of approach being
taken that is learn as you learn, which we think is fantastic.
One of the other components is retention of the workforce.
So the workforce is leaving in droves so we need to address the retention
issues. That probably looks like pay but it might also
look like finding out, uh, why they're leaving and addressing some of those
issues.
Thank you, Sarah. Thank you very much for, um, making yourself available to the
committee today. We greatly appreciate your time.
That's all right. Thank you so much.
And all your hard work too. Thank you.
You too. Have a good New Year's and Christmas. Kia ora.
Likewise.
Bye.